uh we start in Gaza where the number of
people fleeing South is surging as
Israel intensifies its military
operations against Hamas Israel's
military says 50,000 people left the
north on Wednesday alone adding that
gazans believe Hamas has lost control
there hoping for the protection of the
white flag in the few hours allotted by
Israel for safe passage thousands of
people headed south on G 's Main
Highway the Israeli military have been
telling people to get out of Northern
Gaza since the beginning of their air
campaign against
Hamas we left the area due to the
intense bombardment we'd been holding on
there for 32 days yesterday we made the
decision to leave because the bombing
was very intense women and children were
terrified and we couldn't bear it any
longer may God help
us but even on the road dedicated for
safe passage the bombardment is not far
away the situation is
devastating and Aid organizations such
as Doctors Without Borders say nowhere
in Gaza is
safe for the Palestinians displaced from
the north this is what awaits them in
the south of the strip in KH Yunis an
air strike brought down a
mosque several other buildings in the
residential area were also
destroyed we were sitting there when all
of a sudden an F-16 air strike landed on
a house and blew it up the entire block
three houses next to each other without
any warning people were just coming and
going all of them civilians an old woman
an old man and there are others still
missing under the rubble still haven't
been found
yet for the First Responders giving up
hope of finding survivors is not an
option but for many here there's no hope
and no
Escape tw's Israel correspondent Rebecca
rers joins us now from Jerusalem Rebecca
the Israeli military says thousands are
fleeing from northern Gaza because Hamas
has lost control there what's the latest
on the
offensive well we know that it is
intensifying Gard we know that for a
couple of days now troops have been
surrounding Gaza City and they're
starting to push into the closer to the
center of the city uh which they believe
is Hamas you know head the headquarters
basically the stronghold uh we know that
all they've also split the uh the strip
in two having North Gaza and South Gaza
and that they say that Hamas has lost
control in the northern part of the
strip though it is there are still
ongoing battles in the whole of the in
the northern area now we've seen those
really dramatic pictures of those people
trying to get from the north to the
South Israel has said that it's open
open up these corridors uh some 50,000
people it's thought were move moved
South yesterday you saw some of the
pictures there in that report holding
White flags and the very few belongings
that they have left um whether or not
that makes them any safer of course
remains to be seen the entire strip is
being bombarded and even areas in the
South that Israel have said you know
people should move to for protection are
also being bombed so there really
doesn't appear to be anywhere in the
strip that safe for civilians um we know
that um as well this earlier this
morning the Israeli military saying that
they've taken control of another Hamas
stronghold in the jabalia refugee camp
as well so that uh offensive
intensifying as they continue their
battle to try and Route out Hamas
completely Rebecca Israel's prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu has again
rejected a CE far and also dismissed
reports that direct talks are underway
on the potential release of hostages in
return for a temporary pause in fighting
what more do you know about
that well it's really difficult to get
accurate and up to the minute you know
this information on these talks are
obviously uh very secretive um and
Israel isn't in direct contact with
Hamas they're not part of the talks
they're working through intermediaries
particularly Qatar and Egypt who've been
working hard they've also been heavily
involved in the the hostage releases
that we've seen so far now we know that
before before this offensive began there
were talks to get quite a number of the
civilian hostages uh released but pretty
much the talks broke down when that
ground offensive uh began and now we do
believe that these talks are ongoing and
they're for around 10 to 15 hostages
that could be released if uh Israel were
to agree to a temporary ceasefire to
allow for humanitarian Aid as you you
point out that's something that Israel
are not willing to agree to at this
stage so the talks uh we believe are
continuing
thank you very much Rebecca riches there
reporting from
Jerusalem well for more now on
developments in Gaza we can speak to
Peter Lana he's a spokesperson for the
Israel Defense Forces and joins us from
Tel Aviv welcome to the program Mr Lana
Israeli armed forces are now in the
heart of Gaza City I understand tell us
what that battle looks
like uh Terry good morning indeed the NF
is continuing to pursue Hamas wherever
they are hiding in order to dismantle
and destroy their terrorist capabilities
and make sure that they never have the
power to govern Gaza again as a staging
ground against uh for terrorism against
Israel so what we've seen over the last
five or six days is a continuing uh
advance in towards uh Gaza City in
towards the surrounding areas of the
Gaza City and it is close combat Urban
Warfare um RPGs being fired at our
forces terrorists coming out of tunnels
that they pre-prepared and built an
extensive network of tunnels uh they're
using explosive devices uh but I would
say that in almost every engagement with
our forces the terrorists are being
killed we will continue to seek out and
um engage them and hunt them down it
sounds like you're up against some
pretty Fierce resistance there in
Northern Gaza uh we're hearing reports
that the Israeli military is now fully
in control there are you in control in
the
North so I have not not aware of any
announcement of us saying we're in
control I would say Hamas is definitely
not in control and I think that is uh
what we highlighted yesterday in all of
our statements and this is where we are
today one thing is for certain Hamas are
being pursued and they have no idea what
is going on they're in a state of
organizational disarray communication
communicational disarray and in disarray
between the leaders and their terrorist
uh terrorists that are conducting the
attacks so of course as expected they're
they've been preparing for the war with
Israel and after they launched the war
in Israel so they ran into their
defensive positions in the tunnels and
they've been preparing for these days so
of course it's going to be fierce but we
will be be Victorious and we we are
determined to make sure that they cannot
use this the the the Gaza Strip as a
staging ground this is precisely what
we're up against um no surprises there
from our perspective indeed it's not
easy it's Fierce um door too uh house to
house and yes indeed they are coming out
of tunnels and we are pursuing them
we've killed uh We've destroyed over the
last uh few days 100 over
130 tunnels we're finding um terrorist
we've seized 4,000 weapons and Munitions
um we are finding the rocket launchers
whether they're in the backyards of
houses or in kindergartens or schools
wherever they've hidden them and this is
our effort to to dismantle and Destroy
hamas's war
effort Israel has ruled out humanitarian
pauses until hostages are freed and
Hamas is defeated uh Mr Lena is it not
possible to provide Aid to civilians and
continue your military operations
against
Hamas so we are continuing our
activities and at the same time we are
maintaining at this hour um for day five
I think U consecutively a a evacuation
corridor from north to south
because in the South it is safer in the
South there is food being delivered
there in the South there is running
water in the South there is medication
of course it is a war situation so it's
not easy for anybody in Gaza today in
the Gaza Strip but the south is safer
from the north and we are up to about
100 a a trucks coming in uh per day now
and that number is expected to continue
to increase um yes the humanitarian
component is a component of our effort
we are operating in under the principles
of distinction between the civilians and
the terrorists the Hamas terrorists um
and that is why we continue to call for
the people who have remained in the
north over the last four weeks to
actually evacuate to the South where it
is safer and where Hamas are are also
operating but their Hub of operations
their Beating Heart of terrorism is in
the north and that's why our focus is is
on the in the north currently uh
humanitarian organizations of course say
that there is a massive lack of uh of
clean water and health care in the South
as well just to be clear about that uh
but the question of the hostages I just
wanted to come back to that so far the
Israeli military has succeeded in in
extracting and freeing one hostage there
are well over 200 there can you tell us
more about your progress in getting the
others
out so our updated number of hostages
being held by Hamas unlawfully in uh God
knows what condition is 239 those are
239 people Stories the youngest of them
is 10 months now when he was abducted
baby kir was 9 months old so this is the
challenge that we are facing of course I
can't because of the sensitivity of the
issue I can't elaborate much on the
issue of hostages and other than that
they need to be brought home we've
demanded that the international
Committee of the Red Cross have access
to assess their wellbeing but Hamas are
ultimately responsible for their
wellbeing we are utilizing all of the
operational tools that we have and it is
a national priority and a priority of
this
war Peter Lana from the Israel Defense
Forces thank you very much for talking
with
us good day
Terry well the United Nations Secretary
General Antonio GIS has once again
condemned the Hamas attack on Israel
last month that left 1400 people dead
he's also criticized a high number of
Civilian casualties that the Israeli
Army offensive is causing in Gaza the
Hamas run Health Ministry says that more
than
10,500 people many of them children have
been killed by Israeli strikes there are
violations by Hamas when they have human
uh Shields but uh when one looks at the
number of civilians that were killed
with the military operations there is
something that is clearly wrong the
highest number of killing of children by
any of the actors in all the conflicts
that we witness is the maximum in the
hundreds we have in a few days in Gaza
thousands and thousands of children
killed and we come back to the situation
in Gaza now where fears are growing at
the deteriorating conditions the World
Health Organization has warned that
disrupted healthc care facilities poor
water supplies and sanitation have
created fertile condition s for the
rapid spreading of infectious
diseases surrounded by rotting waste and
stagnant
water and with no access to clean
facilities thousands of gazin who have
fled their homes now live in this Camp
operated by the United Nations Agency
for Palestinians unra in the southern
city of K
yunes
facing new threats to their
health there are no proper bathrooms the
situation is horrific the health
conditions are really bad a catastrophe
the garbage and the diseases are
affecting the
children diseases are reportedly
spreading quickly in Gaza the World
Health Organization says cases of
chickenpox scabies diarrhea and
respiratory infections are rapidly
increasing especially among young
children and the situation is getting
worse as the number of people seeking
shelter continues to
rise in the conun training center where
22,000 displaced men women and children
are of salt shelter the space per person
it less than is less than 2 square m and
there's one toilet for 600 people
um our colleagues at unoa said that the
worsening sanitary conditions along with
the lack of privacy in space pose great
risk to the health and safety of those
Sheltering there the hospitals still in
operation in Gaza are already stretched
to capacity and these new outbreaks of
infection and disease are adding more
pressure with vaccines and treatments in
ever shortening
Supply earlier I spoke with Toby tricker
from the UN children's relief agency
UNICEF I started by asking him how the
lack of Water Sanitation and healthc
Care in Gaza is impacting children there
yeah you're right I mean the um you know
if you surviving the hostilities is one
thing but also then now you know the
massive concern over that lack of access
to Safe Water uh sanitation uh hygiene
uh is absolutely critical now uh what
we've seen is of course with these you
know 1.5 million probably more now
people displaced around the Gaza Strip
is people living in even more densely
populated areas than they were before um
and then of course you have an increased
risk of the outbreak of diseases um and
at the same time that access to Safe
Water uh is really so hard people are
getting you know three lers per day
maximum and and often that is
contaminated water that's not clean yeah
UNICEF we have a deselenation plant that
we are able to provide some safe water
but it's nowhere near enough it's still
functioning but at minimal capacity so
this is a huge concern you've seen uh
the UN talking about you know outbreaks
of of diarrhea we've spoken to to
colleagues and staff who have been
talking about you know increasing
outbreaks of of diarrhea dehydration and
other issues and and this is obviously a
massive concern in terms of that it
could get worse not better and that's
why it's so important that we need to
get life- saving supplies in as as
quickly as possible to improve the
conditions particularly in these very
densely populated
shelters given the conditions in Gaza
what if anything Toby is your
organization and others like it able to
do there to protect and help the
children yeah I mean well firstly don't
you say obviously it's extremely
difficult extremely dangerous uh the UN
Palestine Refugee agency have now lost
what over 90 uh staff members who have
been killed uh UNICEF staff members have
had families killed and of course
they're trying to protect their own
children at the same time but we are
still operating uh inside the Gaza Strip
we're trying to do whatever we can it's
not enough but we're trying to so Aid is
coming in slowly there a trickle rather
than a flow which is what we need
urgently and we've been moving supplies
so medical equipment uh water supplies
to shelters to hospitals just the other
day there was a delivery by the un uh to
a hospital in Gaza City um so there
there is some supplies moving around and
we are providing some support to
children in shelters such as you know
just recreation activities to provide a
little bit of childhood back uh to
Children give them an hour or so to
forget about all the horrors around them
so there are things happening we're
trying to do whatever we can to scale up
massively given the immense needs that
are on the
ground